Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lopes, and
today I'm joined by Doctor Gabriel Zamos Cregueros. He's
associate professor of philosophy in the College of Liberal
Arts and Science at the University of Colorado, Denver.
And today we're going to talk about some topics
in Nietzsche's psychology, uh, philosophy, sorry. So, Doctor Zamos
Gregueros, welcome to the show. It's a huge pleasure
to everyone.
Thank you so much, Ricardo. Thank you for inviting
me. It's a great honor to be here, uh,
with you and your audience and uh I hope
we can have a good interview and conversation.
Great. So I would like to start by asking
you about some of the ideals of Nietzsche that
you talk about in your work. So you've done
work on the ideals of sovereignty, of wholeness, and
of becoming what one is in Nietzsche's philosophy. So
let's tackle each of them in turn. And discuss
your views and interpretations of them, starting with becoming
what one is. What is that really about?
Yes, so as you say, I, I kind of,
when I was writing my dissertation, I wanted to
be, to focus it a little bit on the
positive side of Nietzsche's philosophy. Typically, when you read
Nietzsche, uh, you, you realize that, you know, Nietzsche
is against all sorts of things. He's against Christian
morality, democracy, all sorts of criticisms that he advances
truth, perhaps even. Uh, METAPHYSICS, whatever. So, he has
many negative things to say about all sorts of
things, but I was always curious about, well, what
is his positive philosophy? What is he, what is
he proposing? What, what are his ideals? Does he
have any, any interesting things to offer in terms
of things he wants us to pursue or, or
such? And that led me to focus on some
of the ideals that he seems to be espousing.
So, as you said, you, you mentioned becoming who
you are or what you are. It's a phrase
that recurs throughout all of, uh, uh, Nietzsche's, uh,
philosophical development. You can find, uh, uh. Actually, the
actual phrase you can find it even in the
untimely meditations because he talks about Wagner in the
Wagner meditation, Wagner in Breuth, uh, he talks about
it, uh, as Wagner looking into himself and then
this act of looking into himself, he describes as
how Wagner became what he is and will be.
So he actually uses that phrase in the, in
the, in the third, uh. Meditation on Schopenhauer as
educator, he, uh, tells us that, uh, you know,
your conscience tells you be who you are or
be yourself. He doesn't quite use that the expression
as become who you are, but he says be
yourself. Everything you're doing right now is not you
yourself. You, you are inauthentic in some sense. So
you, you get it there, then you see it
echoed in, um, gay science, obviously in a passage
that gets cited a lot. Uh, THE passage, I
forget the numbers. I'm very bad at remembering, uh,
section numbers and stuff, so forgive, forgive me for
that, but, uh, you know, uh, he has that
long passage about long-lived, long, uh, -lived physics, and
he said, in that passage occurs the phrase in
the context of saying something like, you know, we
are the ones who want to become who we
are, uh, beings who are unique, who create themselves,
who give themselves laws, etc. Um, YOU find it
in Zarathustra, where he says, uh, Zarathustra in the
4th, uh, book says, you know, I am not
for nothing, I am a person who's trying to
fish, uh, men, right? He, he presents himself as
a fisher of men, a person who's trying to
raise, to raise up, not for nothing. I'm a
person who's told himself once, become who you are,
right? Uh, IT occurs, of course, uh, in the
famous autobiography of Nietzsche as a subtitle, right? Uh,
How One Becomes What One Is. So it's a
phrase that is recurring everywhere. Another ideal that it,
that seems to be present is this ideal of
wholeness, uh, that, that people seem to have detected,
right? Ntzsche wants us to become whole, uh, or,
you know, Goethe in the Twilight of the Idols
wanted totality or wholeness or completion or something like
that. So, there seems to be some kind of
ideal of wholeness. There also seems to be, for
some people, at least, uh, although other people want
to contend, uh, this claim, uh, the ideal of
sovereignty in the genealogy, it's an important passage in
the second Treaties of the Genealogy where Nietzsche presents
the sovereign individual as the mankind come to completion.
The tree of mankind that we've been, the genealogical
tree that we've been uh uh retracing here in
this book, Nietzsche tells us, culminates with this fruit.
Uh, THAT, that, that is full of promise, the
fruit of the sovereign individual. That seems to be
an ideal that he, he, he wants to recommend
to us. Moreover, notice the language of completion, right?
The completion of mankind. So, just like, you know,
uh, people who want to create themselves, who want
to be unique, who want to represent the completion
of mankind or something like that, uh, OK, so,
these ideals, by the way, seem to be related
to each other, and this is also part of
what I want to just flag before I launch
into trying to tell you my answer about What
beyond, uh, uh, uh, becoming who you are, um,
or what you are means, uh, that in some
ways, I might end up repeating myself, uh, in,
in the course of this investigation in some of
the answers because as I study this, uh uh
different ideals of Nietzsche's, I've come to the realization
that there are things that repeat themselves. They're echoes
of, uh, of, of, of, uh, the ways in
which he conceptualize one. Of the ideals that are
repeated in the ways in which you conceptualize the
others, um, so, so all these ideals in some
ways are different ways of talking about the same
thing in the end, uh, I think when, when
you read Nietzsche carefully, you kind of start to
realize that's kind of what's going on. You could
add other ideals that I don't discuss right now
or maybe we won't discuss today, the superhuman ideal
that Zarathus represents to us. I would probably lean
towards the idea that this is another way of
um speaking of the same thing so, so that
the superhuman in some ways shares many features of
the sovereign individual of the ideal of wholeness and
of the ideal of becoming who you are. This
is why Tustra himself explicitly says, I'm the one
who told himself become who you are. So, um.
So that's the first caveat. The second caveat I
wanted to introduce that I'll be repeating myself as
the first caveat, but the second caveat I want,
I want to introduce is uh that there's something
a little bit I, I don't know how to
put this, uh, exactly, but artificial in the way
we Nietzsche scholars approach N Nietzsche. We forget a
little bit that Nietzsche is an outsider. Uh, HE
comes to philosophy as an outsider. He's not really
trained in philosophy. He has teleological, theological, sorry, uh,
interest, as, as a young, very young man that
he, of course, quickly. Uh, uh, SHIES away from,
uh, in, in part thanks to his, uh, having
been brought up in the classicist tradition, uh, and
the humanitarian tradition of, uh, the, the school board
that he attended, that he had the privilege to
attend. And so he becomes, thanks to that influence,
a philologist, but philology is also not philosophy, right?
So he's, he's either, he, he was either a
theologian trying to, you know, uh, following his father's
footsteps perhaps, and become a priest or a pastor
or somebody who thinks about God a lot, or
um he became a kind of classicist in the
end. Of course, in becoming a classicist and even
also in in being a theologian, he He indirectly
dabbles in philosophical concerns, of course, because these areas,
if you're, if you're a classicist, you're gonna have
to read the philo the ancient philosophers, right? Uh,
AMONG the other things that you're gonna be reading.
So, you're gonna read ancient philosophers and you're gonna
get exposure to philosophy that way, for sure. But
he's always an outsider. He's also an outsider in
his own field of training in some ways because
he does philology in a very weird way, and
which is why he was chastised, uh, from the
field in thanks to the publication of his first
major book, Birth of Tragedy, as you may know.
So, we forget this, and what, what I'm, why
is this important? Because In some ways, Nietzsche is
not a traditional philosopher. What this means is that
when Nietzsche comes to philosophy, he doesn't come to
philosophy with the traditional concerns of what people trained
in the philosophical tradition, in the discipline of philosophy,
let's say. Come with, right? So, and what are
those? Typically, there are things like metaphysics and epistemology.
I wanna know what is it to know? What
is the difference between knowing something and just happening,
happening to have a true opinion about something. Uh,
WHAT exactly is truth anyways, uh, you know, things
like that, or what is the nature of reality,
right? What is the, the cosmos made of? What
is the, what is, what? What exactly is nature?
How does it work? Is it made of atoms?
Is it, you know, uh what? OK. So, what
is matter and then what is the relationship between
matter and mind? I have minds and, and, uh,
you know, materialistic philosophy seems to miss the mind,
as Nietzsche, who read Lang would, would, would know.
This is one of the recurring themes in, in
Lang's history of materialism, which Nietzsche read very early
on when he was very young. Uh, YOU know,
that materialism, the, the, the thing that materialism cannot
handle is experience, the, the mental, what, what today,
uh, following Chalmer and others we call the hard
problem of consciousness or something, right? OK, this is
the repeated. A wall against which materialism cracks its
head, OK? Um. These problems, or in, in the
case that pertains to us, actually, let me just
mention one last one. The problem, a sub-problem of
a metaphysical field, the problem of free will, right?
Is, is the world, is reality made in such
a way that you can have creatures that have
free will or does the nature of reality simply
exclude the possibility of having creatures with a free
will, right? That's a it's a, it's a field
of a metaphysical problem. And so Nietzsche Even though
he will make claims. That, of course, are claims
that you would have to categorize, let's put, or
put under the, the umbrella of metaphysical claims or
claims about metaphysics, or claims about epistemology, or claims
about free will, right? The, the debate on free
will. Art He's making those claims not because he
wants to contribute to the field of metaphysics or
to contribute to the field of epistemology or even
in in the case that I'm interested in perhaps
the field of free will debates, OK, and I
think that's important because when we miss that. We,
we are in danger of falling into certain traps,
OK? We, we're in danger of falling into certain
traps when we approach Nietzsche's philosophy. We, we are
in danger of, uh, I don't know, to, to
use the kind of typical expression, missing the forest
for the trees, right? And, and even missing the
trees because we mischaracterize those trees, the, the, the,
the metaphysical concerns that he supposedly has or the
Uh, epistemological concern or his concern with free will,
right? Uh, WE, we miss those things and in
missing, and even in the, in themselves, but more
importantly, we miss what Nietzsche is actually trying to
do in his philosophy, which is not contribute to
perhaps metaphysical. Debates or contribute to epistemological debates or
contribute to the free will debate, OK, um, as
we understand it. So, so that's it, that's a
caveat I want to express here, right? So when
we're looking for Uh, you know, uh, and, and
it's, and, and part of the issue here too
is that we have those concerns because we are
trained as philosophers that we're interested in. In my
case, the free will debate a little bit, right?
That's one of my interests. OK, fantastic. Um, BUT
In, in, in bringing this interest into Nietzsche's philosophy,
I, I may end up uh uh twisting Nietzsche's
philosophy beyond recognition because I kind of foist and
onto Nietzsche and a demand that, that he answer
the questions that I'm interested in. Even though he
maybe doesn't want to, right? He's, he's doing something
else. And so that's a, a pitfall, that's a
danger I can fall into very easily. I can
start reconstructing Nietzsche's metaphysics, trying to reconstruct it, right?
When maybe Nietzsche was not interested in giving you
a coherent picture of what his metaphysics were, OK?
Um, AND, and stuff like that. So this is
a, this is a, a, a danger. That I
think we have to be wary of, we have
to be aware of, and we have to try
to bring to mind when we're trying to do
these reconstructions because the other thing I want to
say is I'm not disparaging of the effort of
trying to figure out what Nietzsche's moral psychology is,
or to try to figure out what Nietzsche's metaphysics
is, or to try to figure out what Nietzsche
had to say about the free will debate, if
he had any position that I can. Reconstruct or
whatever in him. I don't disparage of those efforts.
I, I think they're valuable and we can learn
things about Nietzsche's philosophy, but we do, we should
keep in mind that in some ways, they're artificial.
They're not really what Nietzsche is doing, OK? And
that we therefore have to be careful not to
miss what Nietzsche's actually doing. And so, having said
that, of course I myself am guilty of trying
to do a kind of reconstruction sometimes of, uh,
you know, what is Nietzsche saying, for instance, in,
in becoming who you are, to come, to come
back to your question now, uh, forgive me, I'll
take, I'll take sips of water every once in
a while. I hope that's OK. No,
that's OK.
Um, OK, so. Uh, uh, uh, YOU know, in
the, in my case of trying to figure out
what Nietzsche has to say about, uh, becoming who
you are, um, I'm, I'm, uh, uh interest, I
was, I, I came into that debate. And by
the way, this is not published, uh, the, the,
uh, uh, it's, it's published as part of my
dissertation. So, in my dissertation, I tackled those three
ideals that you mentioned, becoming who you are, wholeness,
and sovereignty, but I've actually only published, uh, uh,
versions of what I wrote in my dissertation for
the ideals of wholeness and for the ideals, of
sovereignty. I haven't really published, uh, what I wrote
about becoming who you are. Uh, BUT it's still
available online if people are interested in reading it,
so you can, you can find my dissertation online,
probably if you Google me and you, you find
the dissertation, you'll be able to read it. Uh,
IN the, in the case of becoming who you
are, uh, I kind of, uh, went into it
because there was a, a sort of debate that,
uh, in the literature about how to understand becoming
who you are, framed, uh, in terms of two
sort of posi positions, right? One was, uh, Nehama's
position where becoming who You are, it's about organizing,
uh, yourself or your, your mental life to some
extent or yourself, uh, uh, into a narrative unity
in the way literature kind of, uh, create constructs
narratives, uh, where you organize what you think, what
you want, what you desire in. To this kind
of narrative unity. And then there is the, uh,
sort of, uh, Brian Leiter position, for instance, uh,
that wants to see becoming who you are as
a kind of causally determined process where you're destined
to become what you were always naturally, uh, uh,
destined to become because of your essential natural properties
or, or characteristics or something like that. With very
diametrically opposed right ways of thinking, and I was
like, well, let me explore what does it mean
to become who you are according to Nietzsche in
the book that bears the subtitle, uh, in the
phrase in its subtitle, namely, e que homo, um,
what exactly is Nietzsche, uh, here? Uh, DOING, what
does he have to say about how you become
who you are, and does that reveal Whether N
Nietzsche is thinking that human beings have no genial
capacity like Leiter wants, wants us to, to, to
think, or whether, uh, Nietzsche thinks that humans do
have some kind of a genial capacity to contribute
to the process of becoming who they are, uh,
in some way which would, would, which would imply
they have some kind of autonomy or free will
in what they're doing, OK, um, and, and then,
you know, maybe ask questions about, well, but is
that about organizing yourself in the way that. Uh,
Nehamas things or not, OK? Um, AND so, when
I did that, and, and I started to explore,
I, I noticed that there, there are, of course,
many, many, um, Things Nietzsche says in Eke homo.
That it sound like the picture of uh uh
fatalism that uh Brian Leiter uh likes to emphasize,
right? Nietzsche talks about instincts that he has that
kind of direct him to particular places and, and
do all those kinds of things, um, but he
also, uh, has other moments where he seems to
speak of reflection and Consciousness and self-knowledge and coming
to reflect and find reason in reality prompted by
the fact that he was sick, um, which have
a consequence that sounds a little bit contrary to
what the, the lighter picture is presenting us, namely
the consequence of actually creating instincts in you that
you didn't have before. So there's a point in
uhque home, I forget which section exactly. I think
it's the, it might be the, why am I
so, um. Uh, CLEVER or, or intelligent, uh, section,
um, where he says, I have an, uh, you
know, the, the, the people need to have an
instinct of self-defense, which is also called taste. To,
you know, preserve their task and their, and their,
uh, and their uniqueness and their, so they can
become who they are. And I totally lacked it,
OK? I had no instinct of self-defense for the
longest part of my life. I lacked this ins
I lacked the instinct. It It was thanks to
my sickness that I started to reflect and find
reason in reality, and thanks to this reflection and
this finding reason in reality, I developed in the
last 10 years of my life the instinct of
self-defense, basically is what he's saying, OK? I finally
developed this instinct. Uh, WHICH now seems to, uh,
posit a kind of agential capacity that works by
way of what typically we think agential capacities or
free will in the human being works, namely by
practical deliberation. There's some kind of practical deliberation. You're
using your reason. You come to know something about
yourself, and this self-knowledge transforms the way you, uh,
act in the world, right? Uh, SO your self-understanding.
Creates intentions in you that then you, uh, go
out into the world to manifest, right, um, in
the, in the, in the, in the, in this
case, the intention to create an instinct of freedom
and to cultivate it in the right way, uh,
sorry, not an instinct of freedom, it's instinct of
self-defense and cultivate it in the right way, right?
Uh, THERE is also another moment in Nietzsche's, uh,
actually the moment where he finally tells us how
you become what you are, right? He comes a
there comes a moment in Ekehomo where he says,
I can no longer delay telling you, reader, how
you become who you are. You become how you
are by keeping your, your, your autonomy agency away
uh uh from become, by not understanding yourself too
quickly, by not engaging in this process of self-knowledge
and self-reflection too quickly, right? You have to be
careful, you have to guard against your autonomy, against
this capacity you have. To, through your reflection and
your rationality, inject yourself into the causal stream of
your life, right? You have to be careful because
injecting yourself into the causal stream of your life
too soon when you don't really have a correct
understanding of who you are is problematic, right? This
is something that, that he says, uh, in, in,
in Eke homo 2. So this again would be,
would mean, oh, we have a practical capacity, we
have some kind of free will. That functions in
the way that typically free wills have been characterized
to function, namely self-reflection, self-understanding, reason, right, rationality, self-knowledge,
and With this self-knowledge and reflection and all that
stuff, you form intentions that are truly your own
and you inject yourself into the causal stream of
the world. Now, I don't know if I actually
answered your question about what is it to become
who you are because of course, uh, you're supposed
to. Prevent your autonomy from. Knowing itself too quickly
and therefore intervening in your life too quickly, uh,
Nietzsche, Nietzsche says, you know, in particular, you should
guard against, uh, you know, all great gestures, right?
So becoming attached to great causes or all great,
uh, uh, he should, he should, he should probably,
I don't think he mentioned it, but he should
also probably say great men, like he did, for
instance, with Wagner back when he was young, right?
Um. Because They might not be so great in
the end, right? And you are, you are yet
not in the position to realize that and to
know that. Um, SO you have to, you have
to, uh, disengage your autonomous agency sometimes. You have
to adopt the kind of fatalistic attitude of the
sort, uh, perhaps Brian Leiter, uh, would, would like
to, uh, recommend, namely, just be a cultural spectator
of your life instead of being an active contributor
to it, right? But you do all those things
so that eventually you recover yourself and your agency
and become who you are, presumably, right, which, by
the way, if we go back to what I
just told you about Wagner, right, Nietzsche in the,
uh, Wagner meditation says Wagner looks into himself. He
has a moment of introspection. He has a moment
of self-awareness, of self-understanding, of self-knowledge. And that's how
he became who he was, right? That's what Nietzsche
tells us, or what he was and what he
will be, what he will be for the, for
the future, um. Involves, therefore, this kind of rationality,
right? But what is it that you become when
you become who you are? That's a big question,
right? And, and of course, One of the things,
uh, that comes out, if you look at, uh,
if you trace the, the, the occurrence of this
phrase, uh, throughout Nietzsche's work in the ways I've
done, right, uh, in the gay science or in
the, is that it's about becoming unique in some
sense, right? Becoming the unique person you have it
in you. To become, but what is this uniqueness
exactly, right? Well, uh, in some sense, uh, we're
all unique, right? Obviously, because we are, as Nietzsche
says in the meditations, actually in the, uh, second
meditation, no, sorry, 3rd meditation, Schopenhauer as educator, um.
You know, no, you are born right now to
this moment, to this era where you had whole
eternities to have been born, right? And, uh, or,
and, and, you know, whole eternities in the, in
the future to have been born, but no, you're
born right now. And it's because you're born right
now that you have this kind of impulse to,
and, and this demand placed on you to become
the unique person you can have it in you
to become, OK? Uh, THERE'S a sense of uniqueness
there that, that, that is kind of familiar, each
person is a, is, is, is an individual that,
that is irrepeatable, right, that, that, that, that will
never again. Uh, HERE, right? No, never again will
there be a Ricardo Lopez. Never again will there
be a Gabriel Zamos, right? It's kind of like
we are unique in that sense, but that's not
the sense of uniqueness that's at stake here, you
see. It's not just that you're an individual self
that is irrepeatable, that is completely different from other
selves and all that stuff. It's not identi identity
uniqueness or anything like that that's at stake. I
think for Nietzsche, what's at stake is And here
we maybe start to drift into the other ideals,
right? What, what's at stake is the realizing this.
Productive uniqueness that is possible for you that has
to be linked to. Well, broader issues, which are
the issues that Nietzsche really is interested in. Going
back to the issue of, you know, we miss
Nietzsche's philosophy for the trees, right? We, we meet,
we're, we're interested in this insular problems of free
will and whatever, and we missed that what Nietzsche's
philosophy is interested in is not the insular problem
of free will or whatever, but rather, Human flourishing
and like culture and society and how do we
ennoble cultures and societies and the human beings that
live in them, right? That's really the project that
Nietzsche has in mind. It's a moral and political
project to some extent and everything he does in
his philosophy is in the service of that really,
OK? So, so, so the, so the issue then
is about how we connect back to those. Topics,
whatever it is we're doing in this, you know,
in these trees that we're interested in analyzing whether
it's the metaphysics, the, the moral psychology, or what
have you, I think that's one of the issues.
Maybe I should pause a little to, to get
you to because otherwise I'll keep forever.
No, yeah, I, I was just thinking you've already,
yeah, you, you've already talked a little bit about
uniqueness. So let me ask you, if becoming what
one is involves active self-reflection, as you mentioned there,
how do you square that off with Nietzsche's takes
on drives and his seemingly deterministic take on
free will? Yeah, so. I mean, this is a
complicated issue and, and, and I'm gonna introduce another
caveat, which is I'm probably gonna disappoint you and
your audience here because I'm not gonna have a
perfect answer for you or a, or a, or
a really good answer for you. Um, BUT, I
mean, Let me see, how can I, uh, tackle
the, the issue. The, the first thing to say,
um, probably is, look, this is a, this is
a metaphysical issue. This is the metaphysical issue of
the free will debate, OK? Basically, which is If
I describe the human being, if I have a
moral psychology that describes the human being as being
reduct in a reductivist way, as having a compartment
that reduces ultimately to whatever you want to, to
say, drives or, you know, desires or, or, uh,
you know, quantum. Uh, DOING better things in, in
your brain. OK, whatever the hell it is, right?
You have a moral psychology that ultimately is reductivist
and that is deterministic, yeah, that says the, the
relationships of these things occurring in your mental life,
um, are neces necessary, they're necessitated to occur because
of other stuff that's going on, whether it's quanta,
whether it's stripes, whether it's whatever it is. And
then you have a philosopher that is. Saying, hey,
hold, hold on a second, you contribute to your
life by being by doing self-reflection and doing. Now
you have a problem because you're like, wait a
second. You're telling me there is some kind of
agency that I have in my life, and yet
this moral psychology is, is reductivistic and telling me
that the nes that, that, that my, my life,
my actions and everything is basically governed by necessary
processes that are outside of my control, right? That
are not really under my control. How do I
square that circle, right? OK, yeah, that's the metaphysical
problem of free will. It's, it's presented as a
problem of a dilemma argument. If the, if the
If the world is deterministic, right, as my science
seems to tell me, it's a world of causal
connections where things have causal relationships that necessitate their
occurrence, then I couldn't have done otherwise. Then I
can't be spontaneous in my actions. There, the, I
can't have spontaneity in my choices, free will, which
is spontaneity in my choices, uh, the capacity to
do otherwise, we probably have to talk a little
bit more about. Uh, WHAT typically we understand free
will to mean, OK? Uh, MAYBE we'll get to
that when we get to some individual, we'll see,
but, uh, you, you know, this, this capacity is
in conflict with this picture. What, ah, how do
I square the circle? Now, there are ways we
can square the circle, right? We could square the
circle in this debate, for instance, by taking the
compatible list route. And this is in fact something
that many people in the Nietzsche tradition. Uh, OR
who are working in the Nietzsche tradition, what Nietzsche
scholars try to do, right? So, they, they notice
that Nietzsche seems to talk positively about, about freedom
and seems to even talk about freedom as, uh,
you know, involved with, with processes of self-reflection, self-knowledge,
and all that stuff. They are willing to acknowledge
all that. But since they also acknowledge that Nietzsche
has a moral psychology, apparently that is deterministic in
these ways, they say the solution is Nietzsche must
have been a compatibilist about free will. OK, that's
the solution. So let's go compatibly. Now notice, we're
doing precisely what I said. We're in danger of
doing. We're bringing in a, a, a, a concern
we have, which is a debate about free will.
I'm really interested in this debate. I wanna know
if I am free, OK, or not. I wanna
know what the nature of reality is and whether
this nature of reality includes beings that are free
and therefore me as a being that is free.
That's what I'm really concerned about or something like
that. And I want Nietzsche to answer, right? What
does he believe, right, about this debate. I'm forcing
Nietzsche to give me this answer, and I'm gonna
notice. BE disposed in certain directions if I'm disposed
to acknowledge that N Nietzsche speaks positively about freedom
and that he also has a moral psychology that
seems deterministic and all that stuff. So I'm gonna
be naturally gravitating towards saying Nietzsche must answer this
way, he must be a compatibleist of some sort,
of some variety, right? Um, EVEN if I have,
even if I'm having, you know, uh. Even if
I'm trying to develop theories that are outside the
traditional ways in which you think of compatibilityism. So,
for instance, some Nietzsche scholars try to develop the
expressivist notion of, of, uh, Nietzsche's uh agency. So,
your agents express their Uh, their being or something
like that in their actions, um, but when you
explore what this expressivist meaning of is expressing, expressivist,
uh, uh, theory is saying exactly, well, it's a
kind of variation of. A compatibleist notion of things
where you express things in a world that is
deterministic and all that stuff and so, yeah, you're
expressive, your expressions and the and the way you
are, you are in your actions is kind of
dictated by forces that are, you know, deterministic forces
that it's in, in many ways are outside of
your control, that's it. OK, so we get this
tendency, but is that the way Nietzsche talks about
freedom when he's positively talking about freedom. Have we
asked that question? No, we haven't. We kind of
like been blindly already. Predisposed to the answer Nietzsche
must, when he talks in the genealogy about freedom,
uh, in the positive way he does when he
calls the sovereign individual a master of a free
will, it must be free will in this compatible
sense because otherwise we have a contradiction, right? And
Nietzsche contradicting himself? What? OK, that, that, no, we
are after truth. Right? Truth is, cannot be contradictory,
first of all, right? We have a conception of
what truth must be like. Truth is such that
the collection of all true facts cannot contradict each
other, OK? Uh, FOR instance, right? So, we, we
got to iron out these contradictions. We gotta get
rid of them, OK? But then go look at
the genealogy. Uh, IF you look at the genealogy
quick carefully, I, I submit to you that the
conception of freedom that Nietzsche's trafficking within the genealogy
is not a compatible conception of freedom. The things
he, he speaks about in the genealogy are spontaneity,
good and evil, OK? He speaks about I could
have done otherwise, right? Coming to realize that I
could have done otherwise. These are the two basic
conceptions of what it means to be free to
the ordinary person, right? Ordinary people believe. Ordinarily we
believe to be free means, I am in charge
of my behavior because I'm, I can spontaneously begin
a causal series, right? I can spontaneously inject myself
into the world and do either A or B.
I can be spontaneous in good and in evil,
as Nietzsche says in when he says the, the
Greeks, well, he doesn't say, I don't remember if
he says the Greeks, but he says, you know,
uh, the, the philosophers invented the concept of free
will in order to keep the gods. Uh, YOU
know, interested in us, right? Uh, A, a wholly
deterministic world would not have been an interesting world
for the gods. So, what is this concept of
free will that they invented? It's the concept of
spontaneity, good and evil, and the concept of basically
that, that, that the humans could have done otherwise,
right? They could have acted differently. That's the libertarian
concept of free will. That's not the compatibleist notions.
Notice the, the explicit language about Not deterministic world,
right? He, he kind of says that. The deterministic
world would have been a boring world because then
these, these, these creatures are just Passive spectators of
life, they're just muppets, right? Being manipulated by things
beyond their control. That's not interesting to a god.
What's interesting to a god is in the Iliad,
I want, you know, uh, uh, Hector to win.
Oh, but this Achilles does some things spontaneously that
mess up all my plans, OK, so it's like,
oh, you know. Because notice the, also the, the
idea, the, the interest in the gods. So this
is not the invention, this is something that many,
I think, uh, scholars miss, right? They tend to,
to think that Nietzsche thinks that the invention of
libertarian free will is an invention of Christianity. No,
the invention of libertarian free will is the, it's
a prehistoric invention of people who believed in many
gods. I don't know if it's the Greeks, but
it's anybody. In fact, I think it's anybody because
the genealogy is tracing the, the ways in which
we became the animals that we are. And what
are these animals? There are some animals that are
moral, and what is one of the most important
moral categories we animals use, we human animals use
today? It's a category of free will. Compatible is
free will. No, compatible with free will is a
free will that only philosophers can come up with,
OK? When they start to realize that. There is
incompatibility between being free in this spontaneous, you know,
I could have done otherwise way and what my
science is telling me my world is like, which
is causally determined and all that stuff, so I
must come up with a different definition of freedom,
one that is gonna make these things compatible, right?
And they do a good job of telling us,
uh, you know. Look, freedom is about non-coercion. It's
not about not being caused or causally determined to
act in the ways that you are causally determined
to act. Uh, BUT they do a terrible job
of convincing us that what we mean by I
could have done otherwise is It's just logically possible
that if the universe had been different, I, my
action would have been a different action, right? That's
not what we ordinarily understand ourselves uh to be
saying when we say I could have done otherwise.
When we say I could have done otherwise, what
we mean is, I was spontaneous in good and
evil, and if I did the evil thing, guess
what? I could have succeeded at doing the not
evil thing, OK? And that's why I feel bad
about myself, partly, right? Because I understand myself to
be a morally responsible agent that has libertarian free
will, if you wish to put it that way,
right? The, the, the sort of free will that
doesn't seem quite compatible. So, And that's the free
will that the master, that the sovereign is a
master over. I think he's a master over, if
you're careful in the analysis of the genealogy, you'll
find out that the, the mastery the sovereign individual
has over free will is over the libertarian free
will, over the concept of free will that we
humans have been bred to understand ourselves to have
through these historical processes that N Nietzsche is retracing.
So, let's go back to your problem, the squaring
these things. How do we square them? Well, let
me now pause and say, hold on a second.
Remember, you're trying to foist this problem of squaring
the circle here, um, Because For us, there is
a contradiction that needs resolving in the free will
debate. But is Nietzsche interested in the free will
debate in this way? Maybe not. And so he's
perfectly fine with contradicting himself, with maybe giving you
a moral psychology that sounds very deterministic, and, you
know, that ultimately reduces everything to drugs. And then
when he's interested in his ideals about how are
we going to become flourishing animals and all that
stuff, let's talk about free will and becoming a
master of a free will, understood in a libertarian
sense, not in a compatible sense, right? Understood as
the master of a, of a cre a creature
that has mastered the understanding, he has of himself
as a creature that is spontaneous in his actions
and can initiate causal series spontaneously and that knows
himself to be able to do otherwise so that
he feels bad if he does something that then
he regrets, right, or he, or he has remorse
for, um, etc. I think that's, that's maybe what
we should do. Now, of course. This would mean,
well, Nietzsche's contradicting himself. Why would he do that,
right? I mean, it shouldn't we be after truth?
Shouldn't we be trying to uh figure out what
the truth is? This gets us into a very
complicated debate because this has to do now with
the debate about truth and falsehood and whether Nietzsche,
for instance, embraces a falsification theory about all of
the, you know, a meta, which is a metaphysical
kind of claim and also epistemological but metaphysical claim
about how we are condemned as the creatures that
we are to misinterpret. The world, right, and to
foist onto the world categories and concepts that are
errors, that are mistakes, that are falsehoods, and we
can't help but do that. Because of the evolutionary
process through which life was formed. Life, even, even
the amoeba, right? The amoeba was formed through an
evolutionary process that incorporated errors into its formation. And
then when you get to very complex beings like
us, those errors have grown into other errors and
have spurred other errors, and now we have errors
everywhere, and we are a creature that has incorporated
two errors because this is the other side that
people don't. And, and forgive me for going over
a little bit in my answer, but this is
the other side that people often don't emphasize in
this debate, namely that Nietzsche calls the concept of
cause into question, right? Even in the, in the
casa sui, um, A passage in Beyond Good and
Evil, which is often used to, to say that
Nietzsche rejects the libertarian notion of free will, right?
Uh, ALTHOUGH, you know, uh, libertarian notion of free
will is not necessarily the notion of a causa
sui, right? The notion of being cause of yourself.
Um, I, I think that's a, a mischaracterization in
some ways. You don't have to necessarily think that
you have to be a cause of yourself in
order to believe that you can be a spontaneous
initiator of causal series or that you have to,
uh, or that you could have done otherwise, right?
Uh. AND, and Nietzsche is in fact very clear
that that's a superlative metaphysical notion, right? Um, THE,
the, perhaps the libertarian, more traditional libertarian notions are
not superlative, metaphysical, but only metaphysical, right? In a,
in a more humble way or whatever, right? So,
these are questions that are very complicated and that
we, we, we need to go on, but just
to get back to the point, in that passage,
Nietzsche ends the passage by saying, the problem of
free will, and there he's, he does seem to
be referencing the traditional problem, the problem that we've
been talking about, namely, How can I be free
in a world that is wholly deterministic? HE says.
That's a problem that It's profoundly personal. Right? It's
a problem that betrays. The people who are involved
in the debate, it betrays it in this way.
The people who want to assert unfreedom of the
will, cause psychological causal necessity, I think he even
mentions in the passage, if I'm not misremembering, and
all those things, they don't want to be responsible
for anything. They want, they are, in fact, kind
of, they feel guilty, they are sick of themselves,
right? They know themselves to be guilty of things
that they're sick of, and they, with this inner
contempt that they have for themselves, they long to
shift the blame for, for, for themselves, for what
they are to somebody else. The other guys, the
guys who affirm freedom in this libertarian sense, right,
uh, they don't want to renounce the responsibility. They
want to believe in them, they believe in themselves
so strongly. Uh, I mean, uh, that they want
to preserve their personal right. To be in control
of their actions and, and to be the, the
sole responsible causes of their behavior or something like
that. Uh And, and he even says vain races
belong in this category or something like that. Now,
I ask you, in this, in this way of,
of framing it, this personal way. Which is the
noble way of doing, of, of feeling, and which
is the slavish way of feeling? Well, we know
from the genealogy and we know even from beyond
good and evil in other places that the person
who feels good about himself, who believes in himself,
who has trust in himself, who all all those
things, that's the noble. That would be on the
free will side of the vain creatures who want
to be responsible for everything, to assert libertarian free
will. And who is the, the guy who doesn't
want to be blamed for anything and wants to,
uh, you know, renounce all responsibility and become just
a causal arena for events and lay the blame
of everything he does to his psychology or his,
or his society or, or his, uh, whatever, right?
Necessary forces that are working in him. That's the
slave. So, one interesting thing about this is Even
though N Nietzsche is not taking a a personal
stand, and in fact, he tries to, to give
you a different category. He tries to say, no,
we shouldn't talk about free will and unfree will
and deterministic will. We should talk about Strong will
and weak will, right? That's what we should uh
talk about, right? So he, he seems to be
trying to Go away from this debate by introducing
different categories or something like that, you know, uh,
but it's interesting that in the debate, and for
the people who are interested in the debate, he's
also telling you something very interesting. He's telling you.
The people who want to characterize the human being
as Without free will, without libertarian free will, or
with a free will that is not really libertarian
free will, but it's just a, a deterministic free
will, which is, you know, a free will where
the agent is also not uh in control of
his actions. Those people are slavish. They're under a
slavish morality. And they betray a slavish morality. The
other guys, at least they got this going for
themselves, even if they are wrong too, OK, even
if they're trafficking with errors. Those guys Are More
noble because they, they believe in themselves, they want
to keep believing in themselves and they are so
proud and so vain in some ways that they
want to not renounce their merit, right? See everything
they do as their responsibility. It is also interesting
that in this passage too, if I'm not misremembering,
he says all these concepts freedom, causality, we have
invented them. We humans. So this goes back to
the issue I was telling you at the beginning.
From a metaphysical point of view. It's hard to
know what Nietzsche is saying, OK, first of all,
what is the true metaphysics of the world, right?
But And I don't know if we can really
reconstruct Nietzsche's metaphysics in a successful way because I,
I, I, I suspect, I haven't done it myself
because I've been more interested in the ideals and
all that stuff as, as I've been saying. But
I suspect if we try to reconstruct what Nietzsche's
true metaphysics are, we're gonna end up in a
kind of very skeptical place, right? Where Nietzsche, Nietzsche
is gonna say, look, I'm gonna, I'm gonna adopt
the will to power hypothesis because scientific method demands
it, right? And, you know, and because I, We
should talk about will because we, we should postulate
the will as being effective and efficient and all
that stuff. And will can only move will, by
the way, he, when he introduces that in Beyond
Good and Evil, in that section in Beyond Good
and Evil that he introduced the will to power
in this way as the hypothesis that we need
to uh adopt, um. He, he's gonna say, will
can only move will. It cannot move muscles or
matter or like other, that makes it sound like
his metaphysics is a kind of panpsychic metaphysics, right?
Going back to this mind-body problem uh that is
a sub, it's a sub-problem of the free will
debate or is it related also to the free
will debate, this problem, how do you get a
mind out of matter, right? Out of material, uh,
things, uh, going in the, in the world, what
physics tells us about. OK, um. He seems to
be postulating some kind of panpsychism or, or something,
right? Will, after all, is a mental category. So
he's saying, will can only move will, so everything
must be mental in some sense and be collections
of wills, uh, will to power or something. Very
strange metaphysics, but he also is careful to say
it's just a hypothesis, right? It's just a, I'm
not, I'm not actually necessarily saying this is exactly
the way the world works and I have, I,
here it is, the final metaphysics that's gonna reveal
to us what nature is nakedly, right? Ah, I
found it. I am a physicist. I'm the best
physicist ever existed. No, he's not interested in that,
right? He's postulating it for the service of his
philosophy, which is about culture and whatever else. So,
I suspect that when you try to interrogate Nietzsche
metaphysically to the end, To the final consequence, what
you bump into is Eitzche who is not fully
convinced of whatever metaphysical claims he makes and who
believes that metaphysically speaking, the world is quite opaque
to us, OK, and that ultimately we're gonna bump
into. Irresolvable. Unknowns and because we are going to
bound. Up against irresolvable unknowns. This percolates all the
way back to the metaphysical debates you're having about
free will and not free will. Because if you
cannot resolve the ultimate issue of what nature really
is like, Then in some ways you can't really
be sure that nature cannot contain a free will,
right? Or, or that nature is purely deterministic or
that determinism is not really compatible with even a
libertarian notion of free will, because if there's a
qualitaocultas at the very end of everything like the
physicists in the, in the modern era, uh, started
to see, and even Schopenhauer repeats this too, right?
Schopenhauer, who influenced Nietzsche. Uh, WHEN he was young,
repeats this too, right? When we interrogate the metaphysics
of the world from the physical point of view
of the phenomenal realm, right? Schopenhauer says, we always
end up in this occult quality, right? And nobody
can understand and nobody can really Say anything about.
Well, if we end in an occult quality in
an opaque place where the, where the where the
shine, where the light of reason cannot shine, how
can we be sure that there can be no
free will, for instance, even if when we shine
the light in the other parts that are not
opaque, we see determinism going on. Yeah, you see
what I mean. So this is part of the
reason why I don't think Nietzsche. And we, and
we do a kind of disservice a little bit
to Nietzsche when we try to get him to
answer, right? We, you need to tell me, are
you for libertarian free will to court, and does
that mean you reject all your moral psychology stuff
about like, you know, or not? Yeah, now this
does make Nietzsche's philosophy contradictory. There are other contradictions.
I mean, uh, uh, I just mentioned the will
to power to you, right? And where he says
in that section in Beyond Good and Evil. I,
I think Beyond Good and Evil, I'm bad, I'm
very bad with dates too, but I think it
was published in 1986 or something like that, um,
1886, and, uh. Uh, THERE he's saying, the will,
we must postulate the will to power as the,
as the principle that everything reduces to, OK? Or
the, or the thing that everything reduces to. Because,
and we must postulate it. Because by by thinking
that will is efficacious, and it can only be
efficacious against other wills. Two years later, 1888, in
Twilight of the Idols, he's gonna say, the will
is an error, it means nothing, it moves nothing.
It's not efficacious at all, it's just a word.
It accompanies events, it could be absent. What? That's
it, I mean. Outright contradiction, right? 2 years earlier
you were telling me will is efficacious. 2 years
later you're telling me. The will is not efficacious.
Which one is it? Are you changing your mind
every 2 seconds or every 2 years? Like what's
going on? OK, I think this is the wrong
approach because What we're missing is all my claims,
they're in a particular context. When I make claims
about the will not being efficacious, they're in a
particular context, uh, uh talking about certain things. And
moreover, in a particular book with particular intentions. The
book has a particular intention. Nietzsche is one of
the most intentional writers that exist, OK? This is
one of the things that is so attractive about
Nietzsche, I think, and so seductive about Nietzsche, his
supreme eloquence. He's a fantastic writer, OK? He, he
writes so eloquently that it moves you almost in
every page. But he's also super intentional. You get
the impression that every word is there for a
reason, every comma, every, you know, dash, everything has
meaning, OK? It's not there superfluously. It's not just
a decoration. It's not just a way of like,
uh, you know, rhetoric flourish. No, it's intentional. When
he says the story individual is a master of
a free will. There's a reason he said master.
OK. There's, instead of saying, I don't know anything
else, you know, the certain individual has the capacity
for free will or, you know, uses his free
will a lot, or, you know, no, no, he
said master. Why master? He's recalling the master from
the first treaties. OK. This is another spontaneity, the
master in the first treatise, by the way, he
was described as being spontaneous, spontaneous in, in his
action, unconsciously spontaneous, because he's a beast of prey.
He's an animal. OK. Um, Now we have another
master. Is this master an animal that acts spontaneously,
unconsciously, and all that stuff? No. This is a
master that has, it's at the end of a
long process of actually breeding reflectivity and spirit into
the human animal, OK? Making this animal be more
reflective, be more rational, be more conscious of itself,
OK, in, in all sorts of ways. So, when
you are recalling the master in the, in the
sovereign individual, you're, you're trying to bring in the
stuff in the first treaties and elevate it to
a new position, right? And give me a different
type of mastery, a different type of nobility now,
that is the one that we should be aiming
for because it's the one that's promised in this
huge labor of the morality that, that, of custom
and all that stuff that has led to us,
right? To us, the human beings of the present.
Anyways, I, I think I overextended myself. I don't
know, and I started to talk about other things
that I know you want to talk about. Yeah,
yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah,
I was going to say that we will also
get in a second into the ideal of sovereignty
because you've already got a little bit into it,
but let me just ask you one more question
about the ideal. BECOMING what one is. So what
are then the mechanisms through which you suggest we
can I think this ideal of of becoming what
one is?
Yeah, so, so again, the mechanism is self-reflection, self-consciousness,
self-knowledge, OK, self understanding. But with the, with the
proviso, at least in the way in which Nietzsche,
um. Tackles those issues in Ekehomo, right, which is
a very problematic book, by the way, I should
perhaps mention that a little bit because Ekehomo is
an autobiography, but it's not a traditional autobiography. It's
a kind of parody of an autobiography. N Nietzsche
is lying throughout Ekehomo all the time, right? I
mean, he's saying things that are outrageous, right? Like
he never, he never had any religious. He doesn't
know anything about religious problems. When he was one
of the most devote, you know, adolescents in, you
know, uh, he was, he was thinking of being
a pastor and whatever. He, he had no idea.
He's never by experience had any notion of, uh,
religious problems. It's a lie, right? He doesn't know
anything about remorse. Uh, THAT'S a lie, right? A
person who's probably. Yeah, experienced remorse and guilt in
his life. Moreover, he contradicts himself in the, in
the book because he says, I will never forgive
myself for not having an instinct for self-defense. When,
remember when I was talking about he was lacking
that instincts of self-defense. He actually says, I will
never forgive myself for, for, for not have, for,
you know, it's something that I will never forgive
myself. OK, so he has remorse. So he's lying
all over the place. So it's a problematic book.
That's maybe part of the reason why I've shied
away a little bit from publishing this issue about
becoming who you are. But, uh, but in the
book, if you explore it, He's saying, look, the
mechanisms are mechanisms of self-reflection, self-understanding, self-knowledge, which you
have to be careful how you use. Yes, of
course, you have to sometimes not use them too
quickly, withdraw yourself, don't inject yourself into the causal
stream, adopt a fatalistic attitude sometimes, that is good,
right? Especially when you're sick because you don't wanna
become a reactive agent. You want to preserve your
freedom, yeah, that's kind of the, the impetus behind
it. So the mechanism is. I have to use
my freedom understood as a freedom that I exercise
through self-reflection and self-knowledge and self-understanding. But I have
to do it in ways that sometimes actually. Misunderstands,
right? Uses self-understanding to intentionally deceive myself about myself,
OK? So that I can preserve myself and that,
so that other things that are working inside of
me also. Have their say. So, uh, uh, one
thing that I wanna be uh careful about is
Nietzsche, I'm saying N Nietzsche has a kind of
libertarian notion of free will where he's saying, you
know, you're in control of your action through reflection
and all, but I'm not denying that he also
says, I have instincts and I am a natural
creature, and I'm Part of nature. I'm not transcendentally
detached from these other aspects of myself, right? Of
course, I am a natural creature with instincts that
are working secretly inside of me, maybe in ways
that I don't even know and I can't acknowledge,
and all of that is important. I got to
use that too. OK, my self-reflection has to let
those instincts develop naturally, give them good soil, do
those things, right, so that they don't make me
sick and that they can then accumulate all the
forces that I'm going to need when I recollect
myself in this moment of introspection and now understand
myself properly. Yeah, and then become who I am.
So the mechanism is a complicated mechanism in which
you are using a freedom that Nietzsche seems to
attribute to you, uh, that, that works by way
of self-reflection and self-understanding, and you need to do
it in ways that also. Uses strategically that self-reflection
and that self-understanding so that you don't get in
the way of yourself, right, and so that you
can become truly who you are instead of souring
the fruit of, of who you are, right, instead
of spoiling it, um, it's a, it's a delicate
process, right? That's kind of there, yeah, OK.
OK, OK, so let's talk a little bit more
about the ideal of sovereignty. You've already touched on
it several times in our previous questions, but, and
you talked also about what a morally responsible agent
is. But let me ask you another kind of
question about it. Uh, MANY people characterize Nietzsche as
a staunch opponent of the moral notion of guilt,
but in your reading of him, or at least
what I understood from your work, sovereignty entails embracing
one's susceptibility to moral guilt. So
could
you explain
that? Yeah, because sovereignty, I mean, so again, this,
this is going to take us a little bit
into the Genealogy right itself. So he is doing
a genealogy of morality, which is truly a history
of how we became, it's, it's really a history
of humanity. That's why this tree that he's constructing
is the tree of humanity whose fruit is supposed
to be the, the fruit that is promised at
the end of this tree is supposed to be
the sovereign individual. Now, why do I say a
tree? Because we are animals, but we are. Very
different from the rest of nature. OK, we're, we're
very different animals. What is the thing that makes
us different? Our spirit, our intellect, right? In, in
German, guys has this kind of like spirit, intellect,
mind, our mind, yes, our mind, our spirit, our
souls are different here, right, from the souls of
other creatures. How did we get this soul? This
is what the genealogy is trying to retrace. So
the genealogy is actually retracing the story. Of how
we developed the sorts of Deep spiritual capacities that
set us apart from the rest of the animal
kingdom, OK, um, now, uh, what are these capacities?
Mainly moral capacities. What distinguishes us from other animals
truly in the end, is that we're the moral
animals. We're the animals who can guide our behavior
by moral norms, OK? So, uh, so the story
Nietzsche is telling us is the story of how
we became the moral creatures we are in some
sense. It's also the story of how we've spoiled.
The posit, the, the, the, the, the thing that
is promised at the end of this long history.
The thing that is promised at the end of
this, the long history is, you're gonna become the
sovereign, you could become the sovereign individual, the master
of a free will. OK, and all that stuff.
He describes it, maybe I can read some parts
of it in order, we'll see, but, you know,
uh, he did, there's a, there's a very eloquent
language that he's using throughout that passage in the
sovereign individual. It's that language that I By the
way, I want to emphasize again, recalls the noble
person of the first treaties in all sorts of
ways, not just by mentioning mastery and, and lordship,
uh, or being a lord, uh, like 4 or
5 times, I forget, OK. He's a lord of
every will. He's a lord of the other creatures.
He's a lord of, he's lord, Lord, Lord, he's
lording everything, OK? So he's a master. Um, BUT
also by recalling things that he had said about
the master at the end, he had said the
master, you know, we live under a slave morality
that has made us not fear masters anymore. We
have no masters anymore, and there's nothing to fear
in the human being anymore. But there's also nothing
to reverence in the human being anymore. This is
the big problem, right, for N Nietzsche. Well, guess
what? The sovereign individual, he arouses trust, fear, reverence,
he tells us in that passage. Oh shit. So
that's it, sorry, pardon my French, right? That's the,
that's the, that's the, the, the noble creature, right,
that he was talking about in the first treatise.
He's been called that language, OK. So, Uh, you
know, very important, but this fruit is spoiled. The
story in the genealogy is the story of how
this fruit could be the promise, the completion of
mankind after this long process, but it's also not
the fruit we have because the ascetic ideal has
spoiled the fruit. We have science today, which is
not the opposite of the ascetic ideal, but it's,
it's latest manifestation. OK. Now, go back to the
fruit for a second. What is this fruit? Well,
again, it's to have a free will, but what
is it to have a free, to be, not
just to have a free will, but to be
a master of a free will. OK. What is
it to have free will? It's to think of
yourself as spontaneous in good and evil. And to
think of yourselves as I could have done otherwise,
which also implies When I do the evil thing,
I feel guilty, OK? I don't, I don't like
that I, that things didn't come out very well.
I feel polluted in my self-image. I feel like
my actions have now betrayed. My sovereignty if you
wish, right? Understood simply as free will, right? So,
The conception that we get at the end has
to incorporate all these elements. I think this is
something that the literature has missed. The literature tends
to think that Nietzsche is contrary to guilt because
he's against guilt is very bad. It makes you
feel bad and it gives you self-contempt about what
you've done and all those things. It's also a
Associated, as I just said, mentioned with the libertarian
free will, which he is rejecting, right? He's supposed
to be rejecting that, but as I've been trying
to emphasize to you already several times, I don't
think that's true. He's, he's, he's actually using this
notion of free will positively in this passage, for
instance, right? Um, That's the free will that we,
so he's not against guilt. Now, of course, Nietzsche
is supremely nuanced. It's going back to the issue
of he's very intentional. The reason he's intentional is
because he's very nuanced. The, the, the, the, the,
the, the words he used, especially adjectives or adverbs
that he's gonna use, very intentional because they, they
introduce a twist into what you have to be
understanding, OK? Him to be saying to you, right?
And so the twist here is, look, guilt is
dangerous. OK. Guilt, of course, is, it can be
used against the human being. In very pernicious ways,
especially by the ascetic priest who uses it to
turn the human being into a sinful creature, for
instance, right, in Christianity, or, or even in Buddhism,
or even in, I think N Nietzsche thinks all
ascetic religions do this, right, in the end. They
use the concept of guilt in order to make
you into a sinner, which means You are inherently
corrupt, and what is the thing that's corrupt in
you? What is the corruption stemming from? Your free
will, right? Precisely because you are spontaneous in good
and evil, precisely because you could have done otherwise.
That's the source of the problem, right? So, you're
using your guilt against you in a superlative way
and in a kind of exaggerated way, and that
leads to sin. Nietzsche is very much against that,
for sure. But that doesn't mean that there are
positive uses of guilt. Yes, of course, we, guilt
is part of our moral psychology. It's part of
who we are as human beings and what makes
us special as human beings. What holds the promise
of sovereignty for us, could hold the promise. If
you only became a master over that free will
and over, over that guilt that you have, and
that you naturally have to experience because you are
a, a, a creature that understands itself in those
moral terms. If you became a master over it,
now you would be sovereign, right? Now you would
be sovereign, and the guilt would not consume you
to the point of turning you into a sinner
or to the point of making you renounce your
sovereignty, which is ultimately the, the thing that the
ascetic ideal wants, OK, I think my interpretation, um.
So, so that would be the way I, I,
I, I, I, I would connect it. The problem
is not moral guilt. The problem is not understanding
yourself as a, uh, libertarian, uh, free will endowed
creature. Uh, THE, none of those are the problems.
The problem is whether you use all those categories
that you, that, that are now inherent to you,
whether they're true or not, by the way, again,
going back to your. Question back then about like
isn't this contradictory what is the picture of the
world? Do we really have a libertarian free will
or not? I don't I don't care. I need
to, yeah, I don't care, right? I, I'm gonna
use the notion of free will masterfully, right, nobly
to enhance myself and my fellow human beings as
much as I can, which is the task, OK,
um, and, uh, and, and, uh, um. What matters
is then, you know, the novel uses I'm putting
this concept to. The fact that it could also
be used slavishly, right? Well, yeah, of course, it
could also be used slavishly, and it, and when
it's done that way, guilt is very bad, it's
terrible, just like when free will is used slavishly.
Yeah, the libertarian free will, which the genealogy talks
a lot about how, how the, the slave and
the priest use this concept to subjugate, to enslave,
to belittle, to do, to, to humiliate, to do
all those things. OK, yeah, when the, when it's
used that way, terrible, OK, guilt, bad. But this
is the nuance of N Nietzsche. This is how
he's beyond good and evil. One of the lessons
of beyond good and evil is, look, the things
we call good, they're also evil. The things we
call evil, they're also good, OK? They're like, there
is no huge distinction here, right, in values. The,
the, there's a nuance. It depends what forces are,
are using these things and how they're using them.
Tyranny is evil. But used in the right way,
right, which is, of course, I mean, this is
a problematic claim, but anyways, used in the right
way, tyranny could be good, right? It could be
good, yeah, uh. Morality is a tyranny against the
animal self that, that you are, for instance, yeah?
But that's a great tyranny because it has bred
in you the capacities to be in control of
your desires and your passions or to think of
yourself as being in control of your desires and
your passions, of your animal self. You're in control
of your animal self. How did we manage that?
We tyrannized against you with blood and suffering and
cruelty and horrendous methods. That's part of the lesson
of the genealogy. But that was great. I mean,
you know, it, it was horrible too. It also
bred a mentally ill creature, yeah? A creature that
now is in, in, in, in some tension with
its animal self, right? Constantly, a tension that hasn't
gone away because we are all constantly struggling with
not becoming libertines, not becoming just vulgar pigs that
just wanna, like, you know, Smoke a lot of
drugs and like go out and and have sex
with everything under the sun and like you know
uh waste my life doing ple pleasant things that
are just the most vulgar things in the world
you that the the struggle is constant right not
to not to um revert back to that kind
of animalistic. Predatory existence that we came out of,
right? Um, IT is very clear on that. So,
so. We gotta, we, we gotta find a way
in which we can use all these categories we
are now endowed with that are part of our
humanity in order to, here's what I would say.
What is it to become a master of a
free will? It's a little bit to overcome your
humanity, right, to overcome the ways in which your,
the human aspect, the human all to human aspects
of you, your understanding of yourself as a free
being, your propensity to guilt, your understanding of yourself
as a, as a being that can do otherwise.
Can be used against you, can be used against
other people, right, etc. So I need to overcome
that aspect of my humanity. Learn to use guilt
in a, in a way that ennobles as opposed
to, uh, diminishes or belittles the human being, humiliates
the human being. Yeah.
OK, so, on the topic or the ideal of
wholeness then. The most prevalent readings characterize this idea,
this is an ideal of psychic unity aimed at
restructuring the various parts of the agent's mind into
a harmonious whole. What is your opinion on this
thing? Yeah,
I, I, I disagree. OK, so, uh, of course.
Remember that it's, it's linked. This ideal of wholeness
is very linked also with the idea of becoming
who you are, uh, when you trace it, it
tends to occur, uh, in con they tend to
occur close together a little bit in places, um.
And so there's a tendency that maybe it's natural
to think, oh, what Nietzsche is talking about, especially
when we think of moral psychology and all that
stuff, that what Nietzsche is talking about is integrating
your mental life, right? You have drives and desires
and passions and, and ways of thinking and whatever,
and you got to integrate all of this into
some coherent whole and then You become whole, right?
That's what it needs to become whole. Whereas if
these parts of your, of your psyche are all
over the place, they're disintegrated, they're fragmented. Now the
reason I disagree with this picture is that when
you go to the place where Nietzsche really talks
about wholeness, because he talks about wholeness in this
scattered places all over the place, uh, throughout most
of his, uh, books, later books in, in, in
uh Beyond Gan El or in Twilight or whatever,
um. But it's kind of, you know, here and
there, right, in, in, in, in some alphorisms. The
place where he really talks about, hey, we have
a longing to become whole, we should become whole,
with, is the untimely meditations. And when you go
there, what you realize is that the talk of
wholeness is Embedded in a in a concern with
what Nietzsche calls culture which he actually defines by
using the notion of unity. He says, you know,
the culture is the unity in the artistic, uh,
in, in every aspect of the, of the people,
uh, which means they're, uh, forging into unity content
and form, right, something like that, paraphrasing very badly,
but you know, something like that, um, so. So,
it's really the concern with culture and, and, and
the ways in which our modern culture in particular
is a fragmented culture, is a culture that doesn't
contribute to wholeness but contributes to disorientation, fragmentation of
the individuals that live in it. Um, IT'S in
the context of that that Nietzsche says you should
become who you are, namely, whole, right? You should
become whole. That's what, that's the task, wholeness. Wholeness
of the individual and through the individual, wholeness of
the culture as a whole. OK. What does that
mean then, right? What is it to become whole
in this way? In my reading, and, and what
Nietzsche tells us in, in this meditation is, well,
you gotta work at a goal, the goal of
culture, which is the goal of culture, the production
of the genius in yourself and in all. This
brings us back to this issue of uniqueness that
we touched on, uh, a little bit way back,
right? Everybody has a, a genius, right? Everybody has
this thing that could raise itself from animality. OK.
This is also a very uh eloquent uh theme
or, or a theme that, that is very audible
uh in uh the, the, the meditations, this clash
with animality, right? Constantly, Nietzsche is trying to tell
us the genius is the guy who's no longer
animal, right? The, the guy who has raised himself
from animality, who's trying to become truly human, a
genuine human being, right? How do I become a
genuine human? By overcoming my animality, by, by overcoming
the things that are animality, right? Um, THAT'S how
I become truly human. And what is that equivalent
to? It's becoming free. It's becoming a free personality.
My animality is keeping me from my free personality,
right? Here I am. It has a kind of
existentialist undercurrent, right, to the whole thing. Here I
am a being in this world. It was by
chance. I'm a being in becoming. I'm an animal,
right? Of course. I'm not denying that you're an
animal, Nietzsche, right? Nietzsche is not denying that you're
an animal. Of course we're all animals. But am
I gonna be just like the squirrel? Am I
gonna repeat squirrelly behaviors? Am I gonna be, or
am I gonna change the world I've been foisted
into? Am I gonna legislate values to the world?
Am I gonna become my own person? Am I
gonna become free? And am I gonna become a
free personality that Legislate values to itself and to
the and to the world, right? And what values
should those be? That's the question. And the values
they should be, I think, according to the early
Nietzsche is the values that allow genius to flourish,
that's to say that allow people to do precisely
what I'm saying we should do, namely raise ourselves
above animality, legislate values, change culture, change society. In
the direction of what? In the direction of making
us genius, right? Geniuses, right? Uh, Nietzsche is very
universalist in the language he uses, even though he's
also conscious of the fact that not everybody will
be a genius, not everybody will realize their productive
uniqueness. Most of us will remain trapped in animality,
but maybe we can remain trapped in an animality
that is a little bit more ennobled and it's
not just debased and vulgar and libertine or whatever,
if We all, nonetheless, are trying to struggle in
pursuit of this cultural goal of genuine culture, which
is the production of the genius, the production of
the genius in myself and in everybody else. But
if I fail to produce it in myself, there's
still value, there's still the kind of dignity that
I have because I've, I've worked for that. I
tried, right? I, I was trying to contribute to
that. So that's really what it is. Now, notice,
if you put it in those terms, that's how
I become whole. I become whole because I became
part of this project that is a collective project
that is constantly being reinvented by all of us
together because it's the project of how do we
bring about freedom and genius in the world. How
do we bring about the elevation of the human
being from its animality, right? Uh, INTO the world.
What does it mean to become free in that
sense? That's a project we're collectively constructing all the
time, OK? Together. And if we are into that
project collectively as a culture as a whole, if
our institutions are in the business of trying to
produce geniuses, if our governments are trying to do
that, if our economic system is trying to do
that, if a society, everything in society is trying
to do that, then we have a genuine culture.
And our genuine culture will transcend itself. It will
become eternal, right? It becomes a culture that we
can all benefit from, even when the culture is
dead, right? Like the Greeks, right? The Greeks are
dead. The ancient Greeks, right, are dead, but we
can benefit from tragedy. I, here is my book,
Birth of Tragedy, right? And I'm gonna explain to
you how we could recover some of the ways
in which tragedy was doing precisely this to the
Greeks of that time, namely, Putting them in the
direction of pursuing the, the. The task of creating
a genuine culture for themselves and for everybody else,
right? That's what tragedy did for the Greeks in
a nutshell, kind of. Uh, WE could do the
same. Maybe Wagnerian Opera can do it, right? That's
Nietzsche's story in the, in Birth of Tragedy to
some extent. Um, SO, so, that's how we become
whole and that doesn't require psychic integration. I could
be at this gentle, uh, I mean, not too
much, of course, right? We, we do need a
little bit of mental integration. We can't be just
a completely chaotic, uh, uh, you know, bundle of
drives and affects and. Passions and like, you know,
and, and thinkings and desires and wants and if
we are totally chaotic, then we cannot act. We
cannot be free in the world, right? Of course,
there has to be mental integration, a minimum of
mental integration, but the task is not to integrate
everything in my mental life, uh, in the pursuit
of this goal. There might be things that are,
you know, I, I leave behind or I, I
still struggle with in the pursuit of this goal,
my sensuality for For instance, if Nietzsche is right,
right, I want to be a libertine, but I'm
not gonna be a libertine. I can't integrate libertinism
into the goal of pursuing the genius. So, you
know what, I'm gonna repress that side of me
that wants to be a libertine or whatever, right?
So I'm not mentally integrated after all, right, in
that sense. I haven't integrated all my wants and
all my desires and all my things into one
coherent goal because there are desires and things that
I'm Constantly keeping away from the coherent goal that
I'm trying to pursue, which is the, the, the
genius in uh, in myself and in everybody else,
you see. So, I, so, now, of course, I
wanna be careful. I, I'm not denying that maybe
it, it, it's typical of people who do pursue
the, the genius that they managed to integrate every
aspect of their mental lives into a coherent whole.
Maybe that's a natural result of actually pursuing the
genius. But it's not a necessary feature of pursuing
a genius, and it's not what pursuing the genius
means. What pursuing the genius means I'm working for
the genius out there, and what, and, and in
me, but what is that working about? It's about
becoming free, becoming the Unique individual that can make
its own laws and standards and contribute to society
by making his own laws and standards, which laws
and standards are governed by the duty or the,
or the idea that I have a duty to
produce genius in myself and in everybody else. So,
there's a, there's a, there's an organizing idea that
is external, that is kind of political almost, right?
It's a, it's an idea about, I, I need
to help organize my society so that it contributes
to My own genius and the genius of others,
right? And the realization of the genius of others,
um, so that, uh Uh, and in doing that,
I become whole, right? I become a, a, a,
a whole human being, a complete human being, yeah,
cause maybe I said too much. So, OK,
so let me ask you now, I, I guess
that following up on this bit about wholeness, what
is the paths of distance in Nietzsche, and does
it involve contempt toward the common men?
Yeah, so, I mean, I, I, I have a,
a, a, a shorter essay on this where I'm,
uh, I'm actually arguing a little bit against uh
Alfano's uh position and description of the pathos of
distance as a pathos that involves a virtue of
essentializing contempt against the, the, um, uh, uh, lower
man, right, on the part of the, of the
noble, uh, person. So, er, now, so. 11 thing
to say is there's not a lot of passages
that discuss the paths of distance in Nietzsche's published
work, right? There's like, like 5 or something like
that. One in uh uh Antichrist, but the important
ones, I guess, or more important ones uh are
the ones that happen in genealogy and in, uh,
in Beyond Good and Evil. And what he says
in Beyond Good and Evil in particular is that
the patterns of distance is, um, Um Socio-political, uh,
Pathos that exists in aristocratic societies in and in
healthy aristocratic societies when this uh pathos exists, Nietzsche
also says it generates or it contributes to the,
to the, uh, formation of another pathos which is
the internal pathos, right, the pathos of inner distance
he calls it, which he also says is the
pathos of self-overcoming. So the individual starts to look
for er. In the way he describes it, I,
you know, I'm trying to remember from memory, but
he's saying something like, uh, finding distances with within
the soul, finding spiritual states that are rare, that
are high, that are, you know, uh, unique, right,
and all that stuff, right, ennobling yourself, you know,
ennobling, enhancing your spiritual states. Now, there's some relation
then between having a pathos of distance between classes,
the noble class uh portrays this pathos towards the
lower class and, you know, it's interesting that it's
a pathos because, you know, pathos is like, um,
this, this is a, a, a, a term used
in, in a theater context in, in particular, right?
When, when the, the, the, the, or actor kind
of You know, takes on a pathos that then
is meant to evoke or elicit in the audience
feelings of pity and compassion, typically, right? Nietzsche is,
of course, twisting, is saying, the, the novel adopts
this pathos that then presumably elicits in the Uh,
no, in the, in the, uh, common man, uh,
the feelings of distance, right? There is a distance
between me and this noble, right? The novel is,
uh, uh situated in a different place from me,
from the rest of us, right? That seems to
be, um. And then the issue is, OK, what
is the, how is it that this pathos generates
these other pathos, the internal pathos of distance, right?
Uh, Nietzsche says, this other pathos of distance, this,
this, trying to ennoble yourself is a, is a
pathos that gets generated only in aris we think
with the help of aristocratic societies. That's the way
it has always been and will always be. So,
it's very linked in Nietzsche's. Uh, OWN estimation with
aristocratic forms of government, OK? Because in aristocratic forms
of government, the socio-political pathos is the one that
eventually provokes in the population, by the way, the
population, not just, uh, I take it means the,
the, the slaves and the nobles, right? Or the,
the, the plebeians and the nobles, in both of
them, it provokes this inner pathos of distance, right?
And so, one question is, well, how is it
that this is working? Why is it that noble
societies, uh, or aristocratic societies as Nietzsche conceives them,
would generate these internal pathos of distance in, in
the individuals living in this society. And My answer
to that question is to say that the distance
is not just a matter of superiority or power
relations, right? That the noble is situated over here
and he commands, and he tells the, the plebeian
what to do and everybody else what to do,
and that, that, and that he keeps them away
and, and he, you know, keeps them enslaved and
as tools for his plans and all that stuff.
It's not just about that, it, it includes that,
but, but it's not just about that. It's about
the significance that the figure of the noble has.
In the eyes of himself and society and, and
the, and, and even the plebeian person. The significance
is that the novel represents the highest power and
splendor possible for the human type, OK? He represents
true nobility, OK? Obviously, he's supposed to represent true
nobility in healthy aristocracies, because Nietzsche is also very
careful, right? I mean, in Beyond Good and Evil,
he ends Beyond Good and Evil by telling you
what is noble, right? It's a section that says
what is noble. And it turns out when you
read that section that what is noble is, it's
something very difficult to achieve, OK? Nobility is very
rare in some sense. So, even when you have
aristocratic societies, I imagine Nietzsche would say most aristocratic
societies are corrupt aristocratic societies. They're not true aristocratic,
they're not healthy aristocratic societies. They are societies like
the French, uh, prior to the French Revolution societies
where they were just libertines. To be a libertine
is not to be noble to Nietzsche. Again, you've
got to fight that animal. Urges of just giving
into pleasure and excess and like living a life
that is just relaxed and exploiting others for the
sake of exploiting them and all that stuff. That's
not nobility for Nietzsche, OK? Um, SO, of course,
uh, Maybe he over-romanticizes aristocratic, uh, governments, right? But
we, we gotta work with what he's giving us.
So the idea is in a healthy, in a
true, in a genuine aristocracy, the aristocrat represents, actually
represents a person who is spiritually deep, who's spiritually
genius, who's spiritually, you know, giving us laws that
contribute to the genius in us and in everybody
else, presumably, OK? In that society. The distance that
is generated is the distance in which the novel
stands out as meaning-giving. It, it justifies everything else
that's happening in the society, the oppressive structures that
are happening, the way the novel oppresses the other
people or whatever. All of that is justified because
it produces this kind of human being that As
Nietzsche eloquently puts it, uh, restores our trust in
the future, in ourselves, in humanity, right? I mean,
he, he uses this kind of language, right? So,
OK, so you're producing beings that res restore our
trust in humanity and in ourselves and in everything.
No wonder that this kind of arrangement starts to
reflect back in me, into my psyche. By way
of demanding that I try to do the same,
that I try to become a genius, right? I
should do, I should become a noble aristocrat too.
I should try to ennoble my inner states as
much as I can, OK? Uh, I should seek
within myself the deepening of my soul, the deepening
of my spirit, of my intellect in the right
way, right? I should Fight against my animality and,
and, and for the late Nietzsche and certainly for
the Nietzsche of Beyond good and evil, against my
humanity, that's why I have to be beyond good
and evil. I have to be beyond morality a
little bit, which is the thing that makes me
human, right? Because part of what happened to Nietzsche
was he realized that the ideal of the genius
is easily corrupted, easily corruptible by My humanity, by,
by, by, by the aspects of my, my morality,
by, by the aspects of my humanity that could
uh stand in the way of the completion of
my humanity, the realization of my humanity in the
form of sovereignty, for instance, right? This is one
of the things he realizes early on in his,
and this is part of what, this is why
his next book is Human All Too Human. Right,
he's trying to figure out what are these human
all too human parts of my humanity that are
keeping me, that are, that are standing in the
way and that keep pinning me down to my
animality even to make me revert back into the
animal, belittle myself. Humiliate myself, humiliate my humanity to
the point of destroying it and all that stuff.
What are those parts? Oh, it's morality, right? It's
Christ Judo-Christian morality in particular, right? Especially, it's the
ascetic ideal, it's all those things. Those are the
things that stand in the way. OK, I gotta
overcome my humanity now, overcome those aspects, and hence,
the superhuman becomes the ideal, right? Let's overcome humanity.
Let's be superhuman now. So, And, and, and that's
what there are two strains in ways he's doing,
right? So, so I think um We need to
overcome our animality and our humanity, and this is
to ennoble ourselves, and Nietzsche thinks this is done
in a, in a healthy aristocratic society because it
has the pathos of distance, OK, and it's gonna
inject in us the pathos, uh, of distance in
some sense, in our souls, yeah,
OK, so I have just one last question then.
Is this pathos of distance since you Say it
would occur in an aristocratic society. Is it in
any way compatible with democracy, and what were Nietzsche's
more general ideas about democracy?
Yeah, I, I haven't done a lot of work.
There are good people doing work on Nietzsche's politics,
uh, that, that, you know, you should speak to,
uh, for this, for this, uh. Uh, QUESTION in
particular, but, you know, I, I haven't done a
lot of work on Nietzsche's political views really other
than these patterns of distance paper, but, uh, But
I mean, there, there are some things to say.
Obviously, Nietzsche had very uh precarious models of what
democracy, uh, you know, uh looks like or what
democracy is, right? He has the, the United States,
the oldest modern democracy, but that's like born in
a contradiction even, right? I mean, it's born in
white supremacy and like. All sorts of things that
contradict the very ideals that the democracy is supposedly
founded on. So, you know, like, uh, equality and
freedom and all those things that typi typify democratic
uh governments, right? A democracy is the government of
the people, by the people, for the people, so
that all the people can, You know, uh, uh,
increase their welfare, right? Their happiness, and, uh, their
conceptions of the good can coexist with each other,
can be, you know, uh, uh, can, can be
pursued, uh, without interfering with each other. Um, THAT'S
basically an idealized version of what a democracy should
be, but actual democracies are a mess, right, as
we know, right? And they're under threat nowadays. So,
you know, so it's a, it's a, it's, it's
a complicated thing. Nietzsche didn't really have even the
modern democracies that we have now where we could
see that maybe there are ways of handling some,
some of the issues that democracies, uh, uh, present.
So, his model is very precarious. He's convinced, of
course, he's, he presents himself as a radical aristocrat.
Um, AND, uh, As somebody who's pro-aristocracy, uh, aristocratic
forms of government, so he's very much against, uh,
democracy. It's a question whether he would accept that
you could produce the pathos of distance in a
democracy or not, OK? Because he's not, you know,
he's not thinking in those categories. He's not even,
you know, contemplating the possibility, I don't think. So,
it's a question for us, right? The question is,
Could we take this element if we think that
it's a valuable element in Nietzsche's philosophy and adapt
it to our democracies, right? And, and, and, and,
and, and make our democracies kind of uh organize
our democracies in such a way that we could
perhaps potentially um Uh, provoke the pathos of distance,
the enhancement of the human being in all our
citizens, right, or in, in, in, in our, in
our citizens or in the majority of them or
whatever. Help to help our citizens to see themselves
as somebody that is tasked with the, with the
issue of ennobling themselves, uh, of, of trying to
contribute to the ennoblement of the human being and
whatever else, um. That's a question for us. And,
and there, I don't know, I, I don't know
how I feel about uh what answer to give
because, um, I mean, to some extent, I think,
yes, we can, right? I mean, it's not, it
doesn't seem incompatible in any fundamental way with, um,
you know, uh, democracy, that we could, in fact,
organize our societies such that we're not just interested
in the welfare of the human being, And in
the conception of the good understood uh as very
personalistic, uh, conceptions of the good as coexisting which
is human, but that we could even give them
more, uh, ambitious goals, right, that the human beings
should have the ambitious goal of contributing to the
enhancement of the human being and the noblement of
the human being and the, the being that is
constantly working on itself and trying to become not
better, better, but, but, but nobler, right? Mhm. Higher,
finding rare states in himself, higher states in himself,
all this description that he's giving you there, OK?
I don't think there's anything inherently that, that would
stand in the way of that, especially because the
pathos of, uh, of distance, although it involves a
kind of contempt towards the, the person who's lower,
the person who's not ennobled, right? The person who's
not noble, who's too vulgar, who's like trying to
be a libertine or whatever, trying to give in
to his animal side, um. It involves a contempt
towards that from the point of view, from the
vantage point of the person who is trying to
ennoble himself. But it's not an essentializing contempt. It's
not a contempt that says, oh, you are vulgar
and there's no rede there's no redemption for you.
You are gonna be vulgar for the rest of
your life. You are just vulgar, period, right? Some
kind of essentially causally deterministic picture of like human
beings. No, the process of distance incorporates, as, as
you said, you know. The sovereign individual, certainly, presumably,
it incorporates this idea of, you are free, we
are free as noble, right? I can be a
master of a free will. So I can change
that. I can work on myself. I can try
to become spiritually more elevated, OK? Um, ANYBODY can.
And maybe if these vulgar people are not doing
it, it's because something in my society is not
working. Right, to make those people see that they
could do that. Maybe I should change my ins
institutions of higher learning, so that, you know, people
don't just think of their education as, oh, I,
I, I need to go to school to get
a diploma to get a job, OK? And that's
what I'm doing here in this higher, higher education
place. No, maybe I should go to the school
to Improve myself to like, learn things about myself,
to like, transform my being, to learn for the
sake of learning, and not, you know, uh for
the sake of getting a job or getting a
title or not this transactional way in which we've
Conceived of the, the higher educational system, right? This
kind of capitalistic way of thinking about education. No,
let's do the novel way of thinking about education.
Maybe that can help. Um, NOW, again, this is
something that we can do. I don't think, I
don't know if Nietzsche would have, would be on
board. Probably not. OK. Nietzsche's dangerous. He's a, he,
he, because there are, of course, uh, precisely because
he's a critic of democracy, um, we have to
recognize that there are And because he talks about
power and because he's anti-egalitarian, and because we have
to recognize that there are many elements in Nietzsche
that are proto-fascistic, even if it, it would be
a complete, uh, I think, uh, uh, twisting of
Nietzsche's philosophy to align him with fascistic, uh, uh,
ideology, OK? Um, BECAUSE he, there are many things
that he would, uh, be mortified about, um, if
he were aligned with that, right? Most fascists are
Just vulgar libertines, right, for him. That, that they're
not noble, they don't represent nobility at all, so
they are not really, it would be terrible. It
was just power for the sake of power and
they are just, you know, in it for themselves
and all that stuff. So, horrible, no way Nietzsche
would have been in on board with fascistic policies,
but Nietzsche is a guy who talks about power.
Nietzsche is a guy who talks about inequalities and
Hierarchies. He's a guy who talks about, uh, you
know, he's misogyny a little bit, right? He's, he,
he seems to have a, a little hatred of
women or certainly he's not on board with the
equality of women and, and stuff. He's not on
board with universal education either, right? He's like, he
wanted, uh, the, the institutions to not to open
up to, to allow people from all socioeconomic backgrounds
to come to the university. Um, RIGHT? He, he,
he thought he was an elitist, right? And so,
yeah, so, so it's a very dangerous, he, he
himself owned up to it, where he says, I,
I'm not a man, I'm dynamite. So, yeah, you
gotta handle him with a lot of care, right?
Because there are elements in each that can be
exploited in the, in the service of a very
fascistic, anti-democratic, uh, Form of government. But maybe there
are elements that can be used within democracy and,
and with democratic ways of thinking. And I think
this is, I don't see, of course, without having
analyzed it deeply, right? I don't see any reason
why democracies could not incorporate uh among the, the,
the things that they do. A, a way of
trying to encourage people in their, the citizens in
their, in their um societies to Adopt the pathos
of distance, to try to ennoble themselves, to try
to collaborate. In a project of ennobling humanity as
a whole, right? Um, I think they they could,
right? um. So yeah, that would be my answer.
OK, great. So let's send on that note then,
Doctor Zamos Gregueros. Uh,
PEOPLE are,
if people are interested, where can they find your
work on the
internet? You can find most of my, uh, work
online. Uh, I, I have, I'm not very good
at online presence, uh, you know, keeping a, a
steady online presence and stuff like that. I'm, I'm
kind of old fashioned a little bit, uh. In
this way, but, uh, you can find, uh, in
academia.edu, uh, some of my work that you can
download. You can find it in field papers. I'm
trying to also start to go to other, other
of these kinds of websites, but again, it's very
slow and I haven't been very proactive at, at,
at doing it in the right way. But you,
you, you'll find If you Google my name, you'll
probably find uh my work and can download it
for, for the most part for reading.
OK, great. So thank you so much for taking
the time to come on the show. It's been
a real pleasure to talk with you.
Thank you, Ricardo. It was very enjoyable. Thank you
again for inviting me. It's a great honor.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at enlights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Muller, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingberrd, Arnaud Wolff, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forst Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegerru Inai Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoras and
Hal Herzognun, Machael Jonathan Labran, John Yardston, and Samuel
Curric Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran,
David Sloan Wilson, Yasilla Dezaraujo Romain Roach, Diego Londono
Correa. Yannik Punteran Ruzmani, Charlotte Blis Nico Barbaro, Adam
Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alekbaka Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov, Zal
Adrian Yei Poltontin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward Hall,
Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolotti, Gabriel Pancortez or
Suliliski, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffy, Sony Smith, and
Wiseman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg Jarno, Luke
Lovai, Georgios Theophannus, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin, David Williams,
Dio Costa, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie
Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D. Lee Jr.
Old Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber, Robert Grassy,
Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix, Mark Kempel,
Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin
Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensleyman.
George Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate Van Goler,
Alexander Obert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular,
Jannes Hetner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsov, Sean
Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A special thanks
to my producers Iar Webb, Jim Frank, Lucas Stink,
Tom Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller, Thomas Trumbull,
Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlo Montenegro, Al Nick
Cortiz, and Nick Golden, and to my executive producers,
Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and Rosie. Thank
you for all.